
Palpatine Story Explained

When the first Star Wars movie came out in 1977, Darth Vader was the main bad guy, and the Emperor was only an unseen figure in the background. By Return of the Jedi, however, Emperor Palpatine was prominently featured and revealed to be the true villain of the Star Wars universe. With the release of the prequel trilogy, which told the story of Vader's fall to the Dark Side of the Force, Palpatine became the primary antagonist of the saga. So it makes sense, then, for him to return for the final movie in the Skywalker series, The Rise of Skywalker.

The strange thing about that return, of course, is that Palpatine died in Return of the Jedi, more than three decades ago in both real-world time and Star Wars continuity. If we look back at his role throughout the saga, however, we'll see that he was always a figure of unstoppable ambition and limitless evil, so in a way, it makes sense that even death might not be able to permanently stop him from exerting his will over the Star Wars galaxy.

Palpatine's early years

Sheev Palpatine, the man who would become a Sith Lord and the galactic emperor, was born on the planet Naboo. According to the novel Darth Plagueis, young Palpatine first discovered the temptation of the Dark Side of the Force while collecting Sith artifacts. As a young man he met Plagueis, a Muun who was also known as Hego Damask, an interstellar businessman. The encounter led Palpatine to kill his entire family and dedicate himself to becoming Darth Plagueis' Sith apprentice. As a result, Plagueis gave him the name of Darth Sidious.

Like Plagueis before him, Sidious carefully maintained his non-Sith identity as Sheev Palpatine, and he became active in politics on Naboo. He eventually rose in rank to become a senator (after secretly arranging the assassination of his predecessor), representing Naboo in the Galactic Senate. He remained in that position for years, methodically working to accumulate more power, gaining strength both politically and in the Dark Side.

The Phantom Menace himself

While Palpatine gained popularity in the Senate, Darth Sidious formed alliances in the darker corners of the galaxy. Appearing as a mysterious cloaked figure who primarily communicated via hologram, he contacted and manipulated groups who were dissatisfied with the Republic, such as the Neimoidians and their Trade Federation. When it was finally time to make his bid to become chancellor of the Republic, he encouraged the Neimoidians to blockade Naboo, creating a crisis that would provide him with a political opportunity.

During this same period, Palpatine took custody of a young Zabrak and had him raised in the ways of the Dark Side. The Zabrak became Sidious' first Sith apprentice, Darth Maul. Since Sith tradition says that there are only ever two at a time, that meant Palpatine eventually had to murder Darth Plagueis, thus becoming the galaxy's senior Sith Lord. In this guise, he would continue to manipulate galactic conflicts, while as senator, he could use those conflicts for his own advancement.

Palpatine was a master manipulator

Since nobody knew that he was the one behind the Trade Federation's blockade of Naboo, Palpatine was able to exploit the incident to consolidate his political power. When Chancellor Valorum failed to take strong action to defend Naboo, Palpatine encouraged Naboo's Queen Amidala to call for a vote of no confidence in Valorum, which in turn led to a new election. Being the senator from the planet that was in crisis, Palpatine was perfectly positioned to win the election and become the new supreme chancellor of the Republic.

Taking the top office in the galaxy was a huge step in Palpatine's rise, but it would still take years of simultaneously consolidating his political power as chancellor while also exacerbating the galaxy's conflicts as Darth Sidious before he would be able to gain absolute power. He would also need a new Sith apprentice, as Darth Maul was defeated and seemingly killed by Jedi Obi-Wan Kenobi as the Naboo crisis was drawing to a close.

The clones attack

After the defeat of Darth Maul, Palpatine's new Sith apprentice was the elderly aristocrat Count Dooku, who acted as his proxy in leading a separatist movement of multiple systems that were dissatisfied with the Republic. When the Separatists were found to be building a vast droid army, Chancellor Palpatine was granted special powers to deal with the threat.

As it turns out, using other proxies, he'd already commissioned an army of clone troopers, and his new powers enabled him to command that army to go to war against the Separatists. Not only was Palpatine's power increased, but the Republic ended a long period of peace to become a dominant military power in the galaxy, a big step closer to becoming an empire. Outwardly, the chancellor pretended to be reluctant to take on the burden of greater power and lead the Republic into war, but of course, it was all part of the long game he'd been playing since the beginning.

Temptation of the Sith

Three years later, Chancellor Palpatine arranged his own capture by Count Dooku's Separatist forces. He was rescued, as he knew he would be, by Obi-Wan Kenobi and Anakin Skywalker. At Palpatine's urging, Anakin killed an already-defeated and literally disarmed Dooku. From then on, Palpatine began actively working to seduce Anakin to the Dark Side of the Force and make the powerful young Jedi into a new Sith apprentice. Anakin was concerned for the health of his pregnant wife, Padmé Amidala, and Palpatine planted the idea in Anakin's head that becoming powerful in the Dark Side was the key to ensuring that she survived the pregnancy.

Ultimately, of course, Palpatine didn't care about Padmé at all, and it was Anakin's turn to the Dark Side that led to her death. In his new Sith persona as Darth Vader, Anakin Skywalker would become the most powerful ally Palpatine had ever had and a key part of his plan to eliminate the Jedi and rule the galaxy as a tyrant.

The Emperor rises

When the Jedi finally realized that Palpatine was a Sith Lord, it was far too late. A vicious battle with Jedi Master Mace Windu brought about a fearsome change to Palpatine's physical appearance. While there has been much speculation, it's unclear whether Palpatine was disfigured by Force lightning, as he claimed, or whether he was revealing what had already been his true appearance. In any case, the evil within him came to the surface, and his face became grotesque and slightly inhuman.

Ironically, his disfigurement enabled him to turn the Senate against the Jedi who'd attacked him. He took the opportunity to seize the power he'd worked so long to bring within his grasp and declared himself emperor of the galaxy. Although the Galactic Senate would remain in place for years to come, the Republic had become the Empire, and with the Jedi eliminated by the clone troopers, there was nobody left to challenge Palpatine's power.

Keeping the local systems in line

Almost 20 years later, Emperor Palpatine dissolved the Galactic Senate permanently. He saw no further reason to maintain the illusion of representative democracy, because the completion of the Death Star enabled him to rule through fear. Commanded by one of the Emperor's most trusted and ruthless operatives, Grand Moff Tarkin, the Death Star was a mobile space station with the power to destroy entire planets. As a demonstration of its power, Tarkin obliterated the planet Alderaan, home to key members of the Rebel Alliance who were working against the Empire. Leia Organa, adopted princess of Alderaan, rebel leader, and secretly the daughter of Anakin Skywalker and Padmé Amidala, was forced to watch the destruction of her planet from the deck of the Death Star, where she was being held prisoner at the time.

As these events unfolded, Emperor Palpatine remained unseen in the background, while Tarkin and Darth Vader did his dirty work aboard the Death Star. This turned to be particularly fortunate for him because he was nowhere near the Death Star when Luke Skywalker, the other secret child of Anakin and Padmé, managed to blow it up on behalf of the Rebel Alliance. Darth Vader was able to escape the destruction, but Tarkin and the other military leaders on board all died.

The hunt for Skywalker

Following the destruction of the Death Star, Emperor Palpatine and Darth Vader both learned the identity of Luke Skywalker, and they became determined to find him. As Vader searched for Luke and the Rebels while aboard his Super Star Destoyer, Executor, Palpatine remained in the imperial capital of Coruscant and communicated with Vader via hologram.

Palpatine suspected that Vader wanted to turn his son to the Dark Side and overthrow Palpatine with his help. Killing your master after you've found your apprentice was Sith tradition, after all, and it was exactly what Palpatine had done to his own master, Darth Plagueis. For his part, Palpatine hoped that either Luke would kill his father and then replace him as the Emperor's apprentice, or that Luke would die, thus eliminating the threat and maintaining the status quo.

Eventually, Vader would confront Luke on Bespin, but he failed to convert, capture, or kill him. He did however reveal himself as Luke's father, ensuring that Luke would eventually seek out Vader by choice, which could only put him in the path of the Emperor.

The Emperor builds the second Death Star

With construction underway on the second Death Star, Emperor Palpatine decided to take a more active hand in the Galactic Civil War. Arriving on the new Death Star to oversee its completion himself, the Emperor carefully laid a trap for the Rebel Alliance. He knew they were planning to attack the Death Star before it was finished, so he made sure that when the Rebels arrived, the half-built space station's weapon systems would be full operational. This nearly enabled the Empire to wipe out the entire Rebel fleet with the Death Star's massive firepower.

What enabled the Rebels to ultimately win the day was the efforts of a Rebel team on the surface of the forest moon of Endor, where the new Death Star was in orbit during its construction. Led by Han Solo and Leia Organa, these Rebels were eventually able to shut down the shield generator that protected the incomplete Death Star, enabling Rebel ships to destroy it. Ironically, Darth Vader had allowed the ship holding the Rebel party to approach Endor, even though he sensed Luke Skywalker's presence among them. That was the first of Vader's betrayals at Endor that led to the Emperor's downfall, but it was far from the last.

The seduction of Luke Skywalker

As the Emperor had predicted, Luke Skywalker soon sought out Darth Vader on Endor. The young Jedi surrendered, and Vader brought him before Palpatine on the new Death Star. The Emperor could sense that the emotional Luke was veering closer to the Dark Side, and he and Vader encouraged Luke to give himself over to his emotional turmoil. Palpatine seemed ready to die if it would cement Luke's turn to the Dark Side, but he was even more enthusiastic about the possibility of Luke killing his father and taking Vader's place by the Emperor's side.

Ultimately Luke resisted the Dark Side, casting his weapon away. At that point, Palpatine revealed that, like the armed and operational Death Star, he wasn't as weak and helpless as he seemed. The Emperor blasted the young Skywalker with Force lightning from his fingertips, preparing to kill him even as the Death Star's weapons killed Luke's allies. At the last minute, however, Darth Vader was unable to stand by and watch as the man who'd corrupted him and ruined his life tried to murder his son as well, and Vader grabbed Palpatine and hurled him down a seemingly bottomless shaft within the Death Star, killing the Emperor.

Darth Vader died immediately afterwards, his cybernetic life force damaged irreparably by Palpatine's Force lightning. Luke managed to escape, just as his allies finally destroyed the second Death Star, which was a decisive victory against the Empire.

Palpatine in the Expanded Universe

Various tie-in media, with varying degrees of canonicity, established that Palpatine left many plans in motion when he was killed. In the old Expanded Universe (eliminated from official canon by Disney), he'd left a secret Force-sensitive agent in the field, Mara Jade, who would continue trying to carry out the last command the Emperor had given her: to kill Luke Skywalker (although she would ultimately become his ally and then his wife).

In the Dark Empire comics, Palpatine himself was resurrected in a young and muscular clone body, and he had a second chance to tempt Luke to the Dark Side. Ultimately, Princess Leia was able to save Luke, and Palpatine died once again. But more importantly, these stories "never happened" in the official continuity of the new Star Wars films.

In the current canon, all that was really established in the books and comics is that Palpatine sent his forces into the Unknown Regions of the galaxy, so that they would have space to rebuild after his "death," leading to the First Order. But how directly Palpatine was involved in that plan wouldn't be clear until the final film of the saga.

The rise of Emperor Palpatine?

It's debatable, in the end, whether Palpatine died on the Death Star or not, but if he did he managed to come back pretty quickly. He never exactly says how, but cloning seems to be involved. He hid for decades on the planet Exegol in the Unknown Regions. He created the figure of Snoke, the original Supreme Leader of the First Order, to be his puppet until it was time for the rebirth of the Empire as the Final Order. He existed in a withered and broken form on Exegol, with mangled hands, milky unseeing eyes, and machinery that helped him move around. Nevertheless, he built an entire Sith empire on that hidden planet, complete with a vast fleet of Star Destroyers that would be able to crush the Resistance and once again establish his dominance over the Galaxy.

When he eventually revealed himself, he recruited Supreme Leader Kylo Ren, who had already killed Snoke and taken over the First Order. Palpatine promised Ren even greater power if Ren would fulfill his wishes, and for a time Kylo seemed to agree.

Like Emperor, like granddaughter

Palpatine's greatest concern this time was his granddaughter, Rey of Jakku. He'd been searching for her since she was born, but she was a grown woman before she learned about her connection to him and journeyed to Exegol to destroy her grandfather and end his threat to the galaxy. Then she learned that his death at her hands was part of Palpatine's plan. If she killed him in anger, she would turn to the dark side, take the spirits of him and the other Sith within her, and become the new Empress.

When Kylo Ren, having turned away from the dark side, arrived to help Rey, Palpatine drew on both of their life forces to restore himself, regaining mobility and his trademark yellow eyes. He used his vast power to shoot the Resistance fleet out of the sky with force lightning, until a weakened Rey managed to confront him once again, using Luke Skywalker and Leia Organa's lightsabers to redirect the lighting, basically making Palpatine kill himself. His granddaughter nearly died from the effort, but Kylo sacrificed his own life to heal her with the Force.

As for Emperor Palpatine, is he dead for real now? The Skywalker saga's supposed to be over, so it's nice to believe he is. But he might have just retreated to another planet and another body, waiting for a future decade to try it all again. His ambition, after all, is stronger than death.


The Entire Darth Vader Story Finally Explained

In 1977, movie audiences everywhere were awestruck when a cape-clad, black-helmeted villain strutted into the corridor of a starship and earned his spot in movie history. Darth Vader quickly became the ultimate symbol of evil in pop culture and one of the most popular villains in movie history, but as we all know now, there turned out to be much more to his story than a red laser sword and creepy breathing. 

For one thing, we all know that Darth Vader wasn't always an evil presence. He was once a young boy, possessed of tremendous talents and a deep love for those closest to him, and it was only through extraordinary circumstance the he became the Dark Lord we love to fear. As time has gone on and Vader has been incorporated into more and more Star Wars films, shows, comics, and books, we've also learned that even his darkest moments were not without nuance. Now, it's time to chart his entire course from slave boy on Tatooine to the inspiration for the galaxy's current reigning big bad. This is Darth Vader's story, explained.

Darth Vader is a child of the Force

Darth Vader first appeared in 1977's "Star Wars," but he was actually born four decades before the events of that film as Anakin Skywalker, the child of a slave woman named Shmi Skywalker. Years after his birth, Shmi told the Jedi Master Qui-Gon Jinn that "there was no father" in Anakin's conception, leading Qui-Gon to deduce that Anakin had been conceived by the Force entities known as midi-chlorians. Though it hasn't been conclusively stated, it's heavily implied that Anakin's conception was in some way caused by the Dark Side Force manipulations of the Sith Lord Darth Plagueis and his apprentice, Darth Sidious. 

Young Anakin showed tremendous intelligence and skill from a very young age, and was so adept at mechanics and repairs that he began working for his mother's master, Watto, in his shop on Tatooine. Anakin's mechanical skills were so advanced that he began building the protocol droid C-3PO for his mother before he'd turned ten. He was also a skilled podracer, making him a rarity as human reflexes were usually too slow to allow them to survive in the sport. 

However, Anakin's quiet life of slavery was disrupted when, at the age of nine, he met a pair of Jedi Knights for the first time.

Anakin is the Chosen One

While on a mission to escort Queen Padme Amidala of Naboo from her homeworld to the Republic capital of Coruscant, Jedi Master Qui-Gon Jinn and his apprentice, Obi-Wan Kenobi, encountered Anakin in Watto's shop while searching for parts for their starship. Qui-Gon took an immediate interest in Anakin and tested his midi-chlorian count, revealing his midi-chlorian level was off the charts. Convinced of Anakin's potential as a Jedi, Qui-Gon made a wager with Watto that the boy could win his own freedom in a podrace. Anakin won the race and accompanied Qui-Gon and Obi-Wan to Coruscant, but he mourned having to leave his mother behind. 

Qui-Gon took Anakin before the Jedi High Council, convinced that the boy could be the Chosen One who would bring balance to the Force, but Masters Yoda and Mace Windu were wary of Anakin's age and his fearful demeanor after having been separated from his mother. Qui-Gon pleaded for the opportunity to train him anyway. 

In the Battle of Naboo, Anakin piloted a starfighter against the Trade Federation, proving that his skills extended beyond podracing. After the battle was over, he discovered that Qui-Gon had been killed at the hands of Darth Maul, and Obi-Wan made a vow to train Anakin himself, in keeping with his lost master's wishes. The High Council consented, and Anakin became a Jedi Padawan.

Fear leads to anger, and the story starts getting dark

Anakin spent the next decade training as Obi-Wan's apprentice, and proved himself an immensely skilled Jedi who also had a tendency towards recklessness. On top of that, he continued to harbor fear over what had become of his mother in his absence. As a young man, he reconnected with then-Senator Padme Amidala on Coruscant, when he and Obi-Wan were tasked with guarding her life after an assassination attempt.

While Obi-Wan sought to track down the people behind the attempt on Padme's life, Anakin stayed behind as her personal bodyguard and escorted her back to Naboo. The senator and the Jedi soon fell in love, but Anakin's darker tendencies intruded as he became tormented by visions of his mother. With Padme at his side, Anakin traveled to Tatooine, where he learned that a now-married-and-freed Shmi Skywalker had been abducted by Tusken raiders. 

Anakin tracked down the Tusken tribe and his mother, who died in his arms after seeing him one last time. In a rage, Skywalker slaughtered the entire tribe, and vowed to Padme that he would become powerful enough to prevent the people he loved from dying. It was the beginning of a descent into darkness that he wouldn't recover from for decades.

Begun the Clone War has

After the whole Tusken raider incident, Anakin and Padme left Tatooine and traveled to Geonosis, hoping to rescue Obi-Wan who'd been taken prisoner by Separatists after discovering who'd hired Padme's assassin. Unfortunately, the new couple was soon captured by Separatist leader and Sith Lord Count Dooku, and sentenced to death, but as they began trying to fight their way out of a Geonosian arena, reinforcements arrived in the form a clone army. These clone soldiers had recently been discovered by Obi-Wan, and under the leadership of Yoda and Mace Windu, they defeated the Separatists in what would become the first battle of the Clone Wars.

With the battle still raging, Anakin and Obi-Wan engaged Dooku in a lightsaber duel, but Anakin's recklessness got the better of him when he tried to fight Dooku alone. The Sith defeated Anakin, cutting of his right arm, only to then be beaten back by Yoda. 

In the days that followed, Anakin was given a new synthetic arm, and he then retreated to Naboo with Padme. They were married in secret — with the droids C-3PO and R2-D2 serving as witnesses — because the Jedi Order forbade such romantic attachments. Anakin's increased fear of losing those he loved, coupled with his brushing off of Jedi rules, would soon create further friction between the young Jedi and his superiors.

Anakin's apprentice

As the Clone Wars gained intensity, Anakin was promoted to Jedi Knight and became a key general for the Republic. His abilities and confidence grew, but so too did his recklessness and, by extension, his fear of losing those he loved. In an effort to help, Yoda suggested Anakin could learn how to let go of people by taking on an apprentice of his own who would one day ascend beyond his training. He was paired with a young Padawan named Ahsoka Tano, and while the two initially had friction due to Ahsoka's feisty nature, the two ultimately became friends. 

Ahsoka rose in prominence alongside her master as the wars went on, becoming a respected military leader and Force user in her own right, until she was framed and arrested for a bombing at the Jedi Temple that was actually carried out by one of her friends. Ahsoka was expelled from the Jedi Order, but Anakin and Padme believed in her innocence, and were ultimately able to gain evidence that led to her acquittal at trial. 

Though she was offered re-admission to the Jedi Order, Ahsoka was disillusioned after her trial, and she chose to leave the Jedi behind. Witnessing the treatment of his former apprentice only served to further frustrate Anakin, who was himself beginning to lose faith in the wisdom of the Jedi High Council.

The rise of Darth Vader

Anakin's growing abilities and his purported status as the Chosen One had, by the end of the Clone Wars, caught the attention of the Sith Lord Darth Sidious, who was manipulating the entire war from behind the scenes via his dual roles as a Sith and as Sheev Palpatine, the chancellor of the Republic. Palpatine, who'd amassed great power via emergency wartime legislation, finally made his move on Skywalker in the waning days of the war, urging him to kill Dooku in cold blood in the midst of space battle above Coruscant. 

Anakin complied, decapitating Dooku, and Palpatine continued grooming Anakin as his agent by appointing him as his emissary to the Jedi Council. The council submitted to the chancellor's wishes, but they refused to grant Anakin the rank of Master, further inflaming his frustrations. This, coupled with Anakin's frequent visions of Padme — who was then pregnant — dying in despair, led Palpatine to finally reveal himself to Anakin by convincing him that he could stop the death of his loved ones by using the Dark Side of the Force. 

Conflicted, Anakin first revealed to the Jedi Council that Palpatine was a Sith Lord ... and then helped Palpatine kill Mace Windu in the hopes that Palpatine would teach him how to save Padme. Though distressed by his betrayal of Windu, Anakin submitted himself to his new master, who in turn dubbed him Darth Vader.

Darth Vader vs. Obi-Wan Kenobi

Consumed by fear of losing Padme and hatred of the Jedi Council, who he felt had held him back, the newly christened Darth Vader was willing to do anything for his new master if it meant he could learn how to save Padme. So Palpatine dispatched Vader to the Jedi Temple as part of his Great Jedi Purge, where Vader brutally slaughtered any Force user in his path, including the younglings in the Temple. 

Vader then journeyed to Mustafar to kill the last Separatists and end Palpatine's engineered war. Obi-Wan and Padme, learning of his betrayal, followed him there to stop him. Enraged by the idea that his old master and his wife were working together to betray him, he used the Force to choke Padme into unconsciousness, then engaged Obi-Wan in a duel. Ultimately, Obi-Wan gained the high ground in the fight, severed both of Vader's legs, and left him near a lava ditch to die. 

Palpatine journeyed to Mustafar to save his apprentice, then outfitted him in a life-preserving suit of armor, transforming him into the half-machine Vader we all know and love. Palpatine also told Vader that he'd accidentally killed Padme and their unborn children back on Mustafar with that Force choke. In truth, Padme had died of a broken heart, but not before secretly giving birth to Anakin's twin children, Luke and Leia, who were hidden away from him as they grew up. Vader then took his place at Palpatine's side as the Republic became the Galactic Empire, although he still harbored a desire to bring Padme back at all costs.

Journey as a Dark Lord of the Sith
Marvel Comics
Immediately after receiving his new robotic body armor, Darth Vader was tasked by Palpatine with his first lesson as a Sith: building a new lightsaber. But this wasn't as easy as Vader had hoped. As it turned out, he was to retrieve the lightsaber of a Jedi and corrupt its kyber crystal, turning it blood red. Eventually, Vader found Master Infil'a who had escaped Order 66's Jedi Purge due to his vow to remove himself from society as penance. After an intense battle, Vader killed the Jedi master, stole his lightsaber, and destroyed Am'balaar City in the process, though the battle nearly destroyed his new armor.

After bending the kyber crystal to his will — which proved to be a true feat as it almost turned him back to the Light Side first — Vader presented his new red lightsaber to his master, who was pleased with the results. Using his engineering skills, Vader reconstructed and enhanced his own armor to further insulate himself from any potential weakness. After this, Vader was introduced to the Grand Inquisitor and his Inquisitors, former Jedi tasked by the Empire with hunting down and destroying any trace of the Jedi Order.

Palpatine then assigned their training to Lord Vader, who began using his own pain to fuel their hatred. As they scoured the galaxy in search of lost Jedi, Vader's power only grew and he strayed further and further from his life as Anakin Skywalker.

The power of the Dark Side

Perhaps the most important development of this era came when Palpatine gifted Vader a mask belonging to Momin, an ancient Sith Lord and artist, whose spirit still possessed the relic. After years of hunting Jedi with his Inquisitors and enforcing the law of the Empire on countless worlds, Darth Vader returned once more to Mustafar — the planet where he had once lost to Obi-Wan Kenobi and where he had built his red lightsaber — to build his own fortress.

While there, Momin communed with Vader as he attempted to build his home over an ancient locus of the dark side. Momin himself schemed to use the locus to harness dark side energy and resurrect his own body, but his plan was foiled when he chided Vader for his own dark side practices. Vader responded by crushing Momin's resurrected form before using the gateway opened by Momin to search for Padmé's spirit and bring her back to life. Instead, he found only darkness as her form disintegrated before his eyes.

Vader came out of the experience convinced that both Padmé and Anakin Skywalker were officially dead, and that his past no longer mattered. As dark and heartless as ever, Darth Vader became even more enraged in his pursuits of former Jedi and Empire conquests alike. However, Vader's vision showed him one other thing — a beacon of hope in the form of an unidentified young man who he'd soon meet.

Hunting his former master
Disney
Nearly 10 years after their last encounter, Darth Vader got wind of the location of his former Jedi master Obi-Wan Kenobi, now going by "Ben." Under intelligence from the Third Sister — an Inquisitor and former Jedi youngling named Reva Sevander — Vader and his Inquisitors finally found Kenobi on the planet of Mapuzo. Vader tormented the small mining colony, killing everyone in his path until the Jedi revealed himself. Once he did, their rematch immediately commenced.

This duel wasn't as elegant as their previous battle, as Kenobi was a bit out of practice and didn't put up much of a fight. In retaliation, Vader burned his former master in the same way that he himself had been burned on Mustafar nearly a decade earlier. Still, the Rebellion helped Kenobi escape, and Vader pursued. In the chaos, Vader was betrayed by the Third Sister, thirsty for revenge after Anakin Skywalker's massacre at the Jedi Temple during Order 66. Vader quickly overpowered the former youngling and left her to die so that he might continue after Kenobi.

Eventually Darth Vader caught up with the Jedi and they dueled once more, this time both at full power. Although Vader first overpowered Kenobi — finally gaining the high ground — the Jedi found new strength to defeat the Sith Lord. Here, Vader acknowledged that Obi-Wan didn't kill Anakin, he did it himself. As Kenobi left, believing Anakin was truly dead, Vader was called back by the Emperor, forced to abandon his revenge.

Reuniting with his former apprentice
Marvel Comics
A few years later, after the Grand Inquisitor failed to capture a group of rebels who worked aboard a ship called Ghost, Darth Vader was tasked with finding them. After a fierce battle against the Jedi Kanan Jarrus and his apprentice Ezra Bridger on the planet Lothal, Lord Vader failed to capture this group, who would later meet up with Anakin Skywalker's former apprentice Ahsoka Tano. As the Ghost crew continued working with Ahsoka and the Rebellion, Vader continued to send Inquisitors after them, and would occasionally pursue them himself.

When the rebels arrived on the planet Malachor, an ancient Sith homeworld, they encountered the long disgraced Sith Lord Maul, who initially helped them recover a Sith holocron. After Maul's inevitable betrayal, Ezra and Kanan eventually found the Sith Temple where they encountered Darth Vader, who became aware of their activities. As the Sith Lord fought the young Jedi master and his apprentice, Ahsoka arrived just in time to help. It's here that she finally learned the dark truth: Anakin Skywalker didn't die at the end of the Clone Wars, he became Darth Vader.

Vader attempted to convert Ahsoka, believing that the Emperor would forgive her "treason" if she gave up other Jedi and the rebels. Of course, "Snips" refused and engaged in combat against her former master. As the Sith Temple collapsed around them, Vader and Ahsoka continued to duel until Ahsoka miraculously escaped, leaving Vader defeated and alone once more.

Pursuing the rebellion
Disney
Over the 19 years after Emperor Palpatine took over the Republic and made it into his new Empire, Imperial scientists and engineers — including Galen Erso and Orson Krennic — worked hard to build a super weapon capable of destroying entire planets. This weapon, of course, was the Death Star, which was powered by kyber crystals just like a lightsaber. As it turned out, Erso was a Rebel sympathizer who leaked the Death Star's weakness to his daughter Jyn Erso and a group of Rebels. This forced Krennic to use the Death Star on the planet of Jedha.

This caught the Emperor's attention, which meant that Krennic was sent to Darth Vader's Fortress on Mustafar to explain himself. Here, Vader reminded Krennic that the Death Star was not "officially" supposed to exist, and that he should be careful. It wasn't long before the rebels attacked the planet Scarif — which held the plans to the Death Star itself — forcing the Empire to act swiftly. Though they used the Death Star to destroy the rebels on the ground (and Krennic, who perished in the blast), the plans were transmitted to a nearby rebel ship, which Vader had secretly invaded.

Unfortunately for the Sith Lord, the Death Star plans escaped on the Tantive IV, which unbeknownst to Vader also housed his own long-lost daughter Princess Leia Organa, as well as his former protocol droid C-3PO and astromech droid R2-D2 from the Clone Wars.

The rise of the Rebellion

The rebellion's unexpected advantage forced Vader to pursue the rebels. He managed to capture Princess Leia, who sent a message to Obi-Wan Kenobi on Tatooine before her capture. Grand Moff Tarkin, the Death Star's commander, had Vader torture Leia (who he did not know was his daughter) and even used the space station to destroy her adoptive home world of Alderaan as they tried to gain the location of the Rebel Alliance's secret base. Stubborn like her biological father, Leia refused to give up her friends.

It wouldn't be long before allies came to rescue Leia, which meant Vader had an unexpected encounter with an old friend. When this small group — which included Vader's long-lost son Luke Skywalker (who he was also unaware of) and his former Jedi master Obi-Wan "Ben" Kenobi — infiltrated the Death Star to rescue Leia, Vader and Kenobi fought for the final time. Vader killed his old teacher, but the rescue was successful and the Rebels were clear to use the Death Star plans. Unfortunately, in all the commotion, Tarkin discovered the Rebel base on Yavin IV...

In an epic space battle, Vader nearly killed Luke, but the young Skywalker was saved at the last moment by Han Solo, and Vader's starfighter was sent hurtling into space after taking a couple of shots from Solo's ship, the Millennium Falcon. Guided by the ghost of Ben Kenobi, Luke blew up the Death Star for good.

The story takes a turn when Vader learns a secret

The destruction of the Death Star was a major victory for the rebellion, but it also a huge blow to the Empire. This set Vader on a journey of self-discovery. After the attack, Luke Skywalker, Leia Organa, and Han Solo went on a mission to blow up an Imperial facility when they encountered Vader once more. Luke attempted to duel the Sith Lord, and in the process, Vader recognized Luke's lightsaber as his former weapon of choice — the same one he'd lost to Obi-Wan Kenobi on Mustafar 20 years earlier.

After learning that the Emperor hoped to possibly replace him, Vader put his own team together — including bounty hunters Boba Fett and Black Krrsantan, and the archaeologist Doctor Aphra — to learn more about the boy who blew up the Death Star. Aphra learned that Padmé had given birth before her death, while Fett learned that the boy who'd dueled Darth Vader was named "Skywalker."

At that moment, Vader realized that he'd been deceived. He tore his own starship apart upon hearing the news that he had a son, though he wasn't yet aware that Padmé had delivered twins. In keeping with the Sith "Rule of Two," in which apprentices kill their masters to ascend to masterhood themselves, Vader began plans to convert his son to the Dark Side, kill the Emperor, and rule the galaxy.

In search of Luke Skywalker
Marvel Comics
After learning the truth about his son, Darth Vader continued to search for his heir, that he might join forces with him in order to usurp the Emperor. Doctor Aphra learned of Luke's location on the world of Vrogas Vas — which was also home to a long-lost Jedi Temple — and shared this with the Sith Lord, who swiftly arrived on the planet to retrieve his prize.

Though he destroyed nearly two whole Rebel Squadrons, Vader was quickly defeated after Luke sacrificed himself by ramming his X-Wing directly into Vader's TIE Fighter, sending both father and son hurtling to the planet below. There, Vader fended off rebel troops — including a brief reunion with Leia — while Aphra attempted to abduct Luke. Unfortunately for the Dark Lord, Luke's friends Han Solo, Chewbacca, R2-D2, and C-3PO all fought back, saving him and kidnapping Aphra for information on the Empire.

Although he had failed to attain his son, Darth Vader wouldn't quit, though he'd have to put his plan on pause for a while after the Emperor sent him on various "diplomatic" missions to maintain order throughout the Empire after the Death Star's destruction. Eventually, Vader caught up with Aphra and sent her to her grave by releasing her into open space. But little did the Dark Lord know she survived with the help of her loyal (and homicidal) droids...

Darth Vader reveals the truth to Luke

It wouldn't be much longer before Vader tracked Luke, and by extension the rebels, down to their hidden base on the icy planet Hoth. The Empire invaded the planet while the Rebels evacuated, and Luke once again escaped Vader's clutches (but just barely). Shortly after this failure, Palpatine revealed his knowledge of Luke to Vader, and the two began working to bring the younger Skywalker over to the Dark Side.

To achieve this, Vader launched a campaign to find Luke's friends on board the Millennium Falcon at all costs. With the help of bounty hunter Boba Fett, he eventually captured Han and Leia on Bespin and used them as bait to lure Luke, who'd been training to become a Jedi Knight with an exiled Yoda and the ghost of Ben Kenobi on the swamp planet Dagobah. The plan worked, and Luke arrived on Bespin to battle Vader and save his friends. Vader defeated the young Jedi in a lightsaber duel, severing Luke's right hand in the process — only to reveal to Luke that he was his true father. 

Vader pleaded with Luke, hoping that he would join him in overthrowing the Emperor, but Luke refused. Instead, the young Skywalker chose to fall to his death. Fortunately, he dropped through the bowels of a Bespin mining facility where he was rescued by Leia in the Millennium Falcon, leaving Darth Vader alone once more.

Rebuilding himself from the ground up
Marvel Comics
After Luke's rejection and a visit to his childhood home of Tatooine, Darth Vader began an investigation into the death of his wife Padmé and the birth of his son. During this investigation, he met a woman who looked almost exactly like the former Queen of Naboo: Padmé's former handmaiden Sabé. They worked together for a while, searching Naboo for more evidence of who killed Padmé, until Vader eventually confessed to the crime. Sabé and her team fought Vader, but they were no match for his raw power.

Upon entering Padmé's tomb and scanning her corpse, he discovered a medical implant that lead him to the Polis Massa asteroid field — and the same facility where Padmé gave birth to Luke and Leia. Vader was able to scan the records and find a final recording of Padmé speaking with his former master Obi-Wan, reminding him that there was still good in Anakin.

Disappointed in his apprentice's mourning, the Emperor tortured and left Vader for dead on Mustafar, instructing him to rebuild himself. He did, and was eventually led to the Sith world of Exegol, where he was given a glimpse of the Emperor's true power as well as the Sith cloning programs he'd implemented, which would continue long after the Empire. After initially hoping to regain some agency, Darth Vader once again surrendered to his master Darth Sidious, and Emperor Palpatine took his apprentice back with open arms.

The Empire's enforcer
Marvel Comics
After seeing the Emperor's true power on Exegol, Darth Vader abandoned his dreams of Luke becoming his apprentice, believing Palpatine was too powerful to overcome. Instead, Vader decided to kill his son and continued to pursue him as he enforced the Empire's will across the universe. After a frozen-in-carbonite Han Solo was stolen from the Empire, Vader sought to retrieve Solo, believing that Luke would eventually return for his friend. Arriving at an auction for Solo, Vader learned that Crimson Dawn — a criminal organization once run by Maul himself, now Solo's old flame Qi'ra — was selling the Rebel smuggler.

Upon attaining Solo, Vader encountered his son once more in an aerial battle, one that ended with Vader's TIE Fighter crashed once again. Here, Luke even considered killing his father, ending the threat of Darth Vader for good, but he decided against it, still reeling from their previous encounter. Though he failed to kill his son in combat, Vader continued to faithfully serve the Empire by hunting down and destroying the agents of Crimson Dawn.

On his mission to end Crimson Dawn, he once again encountered Sabé, who led him to a colony of former Tatooine slaves on the world of Gabredor III (which was run by Crimson Dawn), but only after revealing that she knew the truth about Anakin Skywalker. On this world, Vader met two of his childhood friends from Tatooine, Kitster and Wald.

Anakin Skywalker redeemed

Sometime afterward, the second Death Star was completed. Palpatine planned to use the new superweapon as bait to ensnare and defeat the rebellion by making it look more vulnerable than it was, while also using it to lure Luke Skywalker, who'd finally completed his Jedi training. Luke re-emerged on Endor, where he surrendered to Vader. Luke was fully determined to redeem his father, just as Vader was once again determined to convert his son. 

Vader brought Luke before the Emperor, who attempted to provoke anger in him by revealing his plan to trap the rebels. After all, anger leads to the Dark Side. This sparked a final duel between Darth Vader and his son, and during the fight, Vader sensed in his son's mind that he had a sister — Vader's second child. Using this knowledge, Vader drew Luke's anger out, and Luke defeated Vader with force. But seconds before killing his father, Luke realized he was becoming just like Vader, so he tossed his weapon aside, refusing to join the dark side. 

Enraged, Palpatine retaliated with Force lightning. Watching his son die in agony, Vader reclaimed the good part of himself that Padmé once spoke of and threw his master down the core shaft of the Death Star, seemingly killing him. Gravely injured by Palpatine, Darth Vader didn't have much longer to live, but with his dying breath, Anakin Skywalker returned to the light, assuring his son that he was right all along.

Darth Vader's legacy
Disney
As Vader, Palpatine, and Luke Skywalker fought on the Death Star, the Rebel Alliance succeeded in their mission to destroy the battle station, and Luke escaped with his father's body just before the space weapon exploded. The victory marked the beginning of the end for the Galactic Empire, and it kicked off a galaxy-wide celebration of the end of Palpatine's reign. 

Though the decades that followed were relatively peaceful, Vader's legacy as a Dark Side legend lived on and took root again in the form of his grandson — Leia and Han's kid, Ben Solo. Ben caught the eye of Snoke, a powerful Dark Side user and scholar who'd taken up leadership of the remnants of the Imperial military in the Outer Rim, forming them into the First Order. Snoke sensed the Dark Side potential in the Skywalker bloodline, and he sought to cultivate it within Ben Solo. He succeeded, and Ben Solo rose up against his uncle, Jedi Master Luke Skywalker, ending Luke's attempt to rebuild the Jedi Order. 

When he fully turned to the Dark Side, Ben Solo changed his name to Kylo Ren and vowed to "finish" what Darth Vader had started: the eradication of the Jedi. He adopted his own red lightsaber and black helmet, setting himself up as Vader's successor. In fact, Kylo even acquired Vader's old helmet, which had been partially burned in his funeral pyre.

Darth Vader's parallels with Kylo Ren
Disney
Kylo Ren's quest to further his grandfather's legacy had dire consequences. Spurred on by Snoke, he helped the Empire-like First Order develop a Death Star-esque superweapon known as Starkiller Base; although it was destroyed by a band of rebels who dubbed themselves the Resistance, that victory came with horrific loss of life — including the death of Han Solo, murdered by Kylo himself. Kylo then pursued the Resistance across the galaxy before a final showdown with his old master, Luke Skywalker — or at least a Force-fueled apparition he believed to be Luke. Their battle was just a ruse meant to give the First Order's enemies time to flee, and although Kylo was unable to defeat Luke in person, the effort it took to project his presence ultimately ended Skywalker's presence on the physical plane.

Kylo's campaign of terror finally ended on Exegol, where he tracked a cloned Palpatine and faced off against him alongside the budding Jedi known as Rey — who, in a last-minute twist, turned out to be the old Emperor's secret granddaughter. Realizing too late that he'd been led horribly astray, Kylo helped Rey defeat Palpatine, sacrificing himself in the process — and adding one final parallel to Vader's portion of the Skywalker Saga.

A long time ago in a galaxy far, far away, a farm boy on a desert planet dreamed of joining a rebellion and saving a princess from a dark lord. Thus, one of the most successful cinematic sagas of all time was born. What began as a space opera detailing the fall and rise of the Skywalker family soon grew into a transmedia empire that tells stories of smugglers, bounty hunters, clones, Jedi Knights, and freedom fighters in the form of films, comic books, video games, TV series, novels, theme park attractions, and toy lines. Today, more than 40 years after it first arrived, "Star Wars" remains a global pop culture phenomenon — and the story still isn't over. 

There's so much stuff happening in the "Star Wars" saga that it can be hard to keep it all straight. That's why we're here to help. Whether you're new to this whole "Star Wars" thing or you just want a refresher on one plot point or another, this is the entire "Star Wars" story, explained.

A long time ago...
Disney+
Having evolved and discovered hyperspace travel, the intelligent life of the "Star Wars" universe forms the original Galactic Republic. The Jedi Order, a group of peacekeepers with a connection to the Force, is also established. But rogue Jedi soon emerge, split from the order, and become the Sith, who use the dark side of the Force.

Powerful warriors known as the Mandalorians also fight the Jedi Order. The Mandalorian-Jedi War devastates Mandalore, their home world. Despite this animosity, a Mandalorian warrior named Tarre Vizsla is inducted into the Jedi Order and constructs the Darksaber, a unique black-bladed lightsaber capable of slicing through anything, save beskar steel. The Darksaber also connects with the wielder on a subconscious level, becoming lighter or heavier based on the way its owner embraces or resists the connection. After Vizsla's death, the Darksaber passes through many hands and becomes a symbol of leadership. In order to properly obtain the Darksaber, however, one needs to defeat the previous owner in combat.

After centuries of conflict, the Sith are seemingly wiped out in the Jedi-Sith War. In actuality, the sole survivor, Darth Bane, establishes the "Rule of Two." It dictates there can only be two Sith at one time — a master and an apprentice. This prevents infighting among multiple Sith Lords, and allows the Sith to go undercover.

Around this time, the long-lived Maz Kanata is born, along with future Jedi Grandmaster Yoda. Yoda's activities during this period are unknown, but he eventually becomes a powerful Jedi who trains many Jedi Knights over the course of centuries.

The High Republic Era
Penguin Random House
With the Sith seemingly eradicated, the Galactic Republic enters the High Republic Era. This is considered a golden age for the Jedi and the Galactic Republic, who are intent on expanding into dangerous Outer Rim territories and giving poorer citizens a place to flourish. This leads to the creation of Starlight Beacon, an enormous space station placed in a dark zone, to help travelers find their way.

Despite the relative peace of the era, the Jedi still contend with disasters and conflict. After the freighter Legacy Run comes apart, large pieces of debris shoot out of hyperspace at near-lightspeed, colliding with planets and killing billions. This catastrophe is caused by the Nihil, a marauder group that extorts planets about to be hit by the dangerous debris. Though the Jedi and Republic work together to stop the Nihil, the conflict leads to the destruction of Starlight Beacon. The Nihl proceed to become the controlling power in the Outer Rim. Elsewhere, near the end of the High Republic Era, Count Dooku becomes one of the greatest Jedi of his generation and trains future Jedi Master Qui-Gon Jinn. However, his interest in the Dark Side proves to be his undoing.

In time, artifacts from this and earlier eras become highly sought after by both Jedi and Sith looking to increase their storehouses of knowledge and power. Other artifacts become the targets of rogue archeologists like Doctor Aphra, who sell ancient weapons to the highest bidder.

A dark lord rises
20th Century Fox
As the Jedi continue serving as the Galactic Republic's peacekeepers, the surviving Sith secretly begin plotting to overthrow them. They work with only two members at a time in the shadows of Republic prosperity. It's near the end of this millennium of peace that Darth Sidious, a Sith Lord who is also secretly Senator Sheev Palpatine of Naboo, sets his plan to eradicate the Jedi and seize control of the Republic's government in motion.

A few years before Palpatine's plan begins gaining steam, a seemingly inconsequential event occurs that comes to affect the whole galaxy. A boy is born to a slave woman named Shmi Skywalker, who claims her son was conceived without a father. She names the kid Anakin. By the time he's a toddler, Anakin and his mother are both owned by a Toydarian named Watto and living on the desert planet Tatooine — but Anakin's destiny soon arrives and changes their lives forever.

A special boy and a new threat
20th Century Fox
As part of his plan for galactic domination, Sidious acts as secret advisor to the greedy Trade Federation, and orders them to blockade and invade the peaceful planet of Naboo. Once the Trade Federation arrives on the planet, Sidious, in his Senator Palpatine role, steps in to advise Naboo's queen, Padme Amidala. He tells her the current chancellor of the Republic isn't acting in their best interests when it comes to fending off the invading army of droids. Working with his Sith apprentice Darth Maul, Sidious manipulates and manufactures tensions in the Republic from both sides. Palpatine is elected chancellor at Amidala's urging, granting him unprecedented power to further his plans. The Trade Federation is ultimately defeated on Naboo, but the underlying damage is done.

Meanwhile, two Jedi Knights — Master Qui-Gon Jinn and his Padawan apprentice Obi-Wan Kenobi — happen upon young Anakin Skywalker while repairing their starship on Tatooine. Qui-Gon senses unprecedented levels of Force sensitivity in the boy, who is already an accomplished podracer and mechanic. Qui-Gon urges the Jedi Council to train Anakin, but the Jedi, sensing Anakin's fear, are reluctant. After Qui-Gon dies at the hands of Darth Maul and Obi-Wan seemingly kills Sidious' apprentice, however, the Council accepts Anakin as Obi-Wan's new Padawan.

The Jedi discover a clone conspiracy
20th Century Fox
Over the next 10 years, Anakin Skywalker grows into a talented Padawan under now-Jedi Master Obi-Wan Kenobi. Meanwhile, Darth Sidious takes on a new apprentice in former Jedi Count Dooku, who adopts the Sith name Darth Tyranus. Dooku, at Sidious' urging, creates tension in the Republic by forming the Separatists, a movement of several planets who want to secede from the Republic. As more star systems threaten secession, now-Senator Padme Amidala fights to keep the Republic together and is nearly assassinated. Obi-Wan is dispatched by the Jedi Council to find out who's behind the attempt on her life, while Anakin stays behind as her bodyguard.

Obi-Wan's investigation uncovers an army of clones on the planet Kamino, seemingly ordered for the Republic by the dead Jedi Knight Sifo-Dyas. These clones were created from the DNA of a Mandalorian bounty hunter named Jango Fett, who was recruited by Darth Tyranus. As payment for helping to create and train this clone army, Jango has the Kaminoans create Boba, an unaltered clone of himself he raises as his son. Jango also continues to take side missions, including one which sees him attempt to murder Padme Amidala.

After engaging Jango Fett in battle, Obi-Wan tracks him to the planet Geonosis, where Count Dooku is overseeing a gathering of new Separatist members. They're already planning on building the "ultimate weapon," later known as the Death Star. Before being captured by Dooku, Obi-Wan informs the Jedi Council of the clone army and Separatist meeting. This leads the Republic to grant Chancellor Palpatine emergency powers to use the clones in the fight against the Separatists, launching the Clone Wars ... which Palpatine is secretly controlling from both sides.

Back on Naboo, Anakin and Padme fall in love. Anakin also grows increasingly rageful: After learning Tusken Raiders caused the death of his mother, he slaughters an entire camp of them. Obi-Wan's capture prompts Anakin and Padme to rescue him and participate in the Battle of Geonosis. During this battle, Dooku escapes, but not before he slices off Anakin's arm.

The Clone Wars rock the Star Wars universe
Disney XD
The Clone Wars rage for three years, with Dooku acting as the figurehead of the Separatist movement and Palpatine the chancellor of the Republic. But of course, Sidious is the secret master of both sides, directing Dooku and pulling strings in the Senate. Meanwhile, a new warlord, the cybernetic General Grievous, commands the droid armies and becomes an important figure in the war.

The war consumes system after system, forcing everyone to pick sides. The Jedi Order is tasked with commanding the clone army. Jedi Council leaders including Yoda, Mace Windu, and Ki-Adi-Mundi are drawn out of Coruscant to fight on the front lines, hampering their already-clouded vision and judgement. Bounty hunters like Cad Bane and pirates like Hondo Ohnaka begin profiting from the war, becoming both adversaries and allies to the Jedi depending on who's paying the bill.

As the conflict continues, Padme remains a force in the Senate, working for unity and fully believing she can trust Palpatine to end the conflict. As for Obi-Wan and Anakin, they fight on the front lines. Anakin even takes on a Jedi apprentice named Ahsoka Tano. Anakin and Ahsoka form a close bond, but when Ahsoka is framed for bombing the Jedi Temple and killing antiwar activist Letta Turmond, she becomes disillusioned and leaves the Jedi Order.

New allies rise, old enemies return
Disney+
Darth Maul, Sidious' former apprentice, emerges after years of surviving on the dark side of the Force and sheer hatred. Maul's brother — the evocatively named Savage Opress — and the Nightsisters of Dathomir restore Maul with mechanical legs. Together, Maul and Savage scheme to seize power on Mandalore and form a criminal enterprise, which puts them in direct conflict with Sidious. During his invasion of Mandalore, Maul slays Satine Kalevala, Mandalore's pacifist ruler and Obi-Wan's former flame. Satine's sister Bo-Katan, a lieutenant in the terrorist group Death Watch, becomes intent on ending Maul's rule and allies herself with Obi-Wan and Ahsoka.

Meanwhile, thousands of clone troopers manufactured to fight as disposable soldiers develop personalities and dreams of their own. Some, like Captain Rex, form strong friendships with the Jedi. Others, like Cut Lawquane, desert the army. And then there's Clone Force 99, aka the Bad Batch. Designed with genetic mutations that make them stronger, smarter, and deadlier than standard clones, the Bad Batch is sent on high-risk missions suited to their unique gifts. Later, Advanced Recon Commando Clone Corporal CT-1409, or "Echo," joins the unit after being radically altered with cybernetic implants.

All clones are outfitted with inhibitor chips that allow Darth Sidious to override their free will with pre-programmed orders. During the war, a clone known as Fives discovers the chips' real purpose but is killed before he can reveal the truth. Nevertheless, some clones remain suspicious of their own creation.

Elsewhere, Anakin and Padme are married in secret. But Anakin's darker tendencies grow more and more fierce — particularly when it comes to protecting his loved ones.

The Sith Lord revealed
20th Century Fox
In the final days of the Clone Wars, Darth Maul, now going by "Maul," has a vision of the rise of the Galactic Empire. Hoping to lure Obi-Wan and Anakin to Mandalore so he can murder them and prevent Sidious' rise, Maul finds himself battling Ahsoka, who allies herself with the clone troopers and Bo-Katan. Maul is captured and Mandalore regains its independence ... for a brief moment.

Meanwhile, Sidious (acting as Chancellor Palpatine) allows himself to be taken prisoner by General Grievous. This kick-starts a major rescue mission. In the following battle over Coruscant, Obi-Wan and Anakin infiltrate Grievous' ship to rescue Palpatine. Inside, they find Dooku. Anakin kills the Separatist leader at Palpatine's behest. Even though he doesn't know it yet, Anakin has basically just made himself Sidious' new apprentice.

With Palpatine rescued, the Republic presses their advantage, and Yoda and Obi-Wan are sent to the front lines to finish the conflict once and for all. Back on Coruscant, Padme informs Anakin that she's pregnant, and his dreams become troubled by visions of his wife dying in childbirth. Anakin is also drawn into a game of espionage between Palpatine and the Jedi. The chancellor appoints him as his liaison on the Jedi Council, who request Anakin spy on the chancellor. This doesn't sit well with Anakin, who grows closer to Palpatine, especially after the chancellor hints he might have knowledge that can prevent Padme's death. To push his plan into its final stages, Sidious reveals himself as a Sith Lord to Anakin. Anakin reports Sidious to Mace Windu, who attempts to arrest the Sith Lord. During the ensuing battle, Anakin chooses to save Sidious, allowing the Sith Lord to murder Mace Windu.

The fall of the Jedi
20th Century Fox
With Mace Windu dead, Anakin pledges himself to Darth Sidious in the hopes of saving Padme. Sidious dubs him Darth Vader and orders him to slaughter everyone inside the Jedi Temple — even the defenseless younglings. One of the younglings, a human girl named Reva, witnesses Anakin murder her friends and survives by hiding among the corpses. Badly traumatized, Reva chooses to embrace the dark side and spends the next several years hunting down Vader.

Sidious' goes on to initiate Order 66, which require all clone troopers to terminate their Jedi generals on sight and launches the Great Jedi Purge. Only a handful of Jedi, including Obi-Wan and Yoda, are able to fend off their attackers. Ahsoka Tano fights a particularly grueling battle aboard the star destroyer transporting the imprisoned Maul; she's forced to free Maul so he can distract enough clones to give her an advantage. Meanwhile, in the Senate, Palpatine uses his power to declare the Jedi outlaws, and turns the Republic into the Galactic Empire.

While most clone troopers obey Order 66, there are some exceptions. Ahsoka removes the inhibitor chip in Commander Rex's brain, granting him his free will and allowing them both to flee. The Bad Batch's mutations make them largely immune to their chips, although some, like sharpshooter Crosshair, later succumb. The Bad Batch's unwillingness to kill Jedi allows a Padawan named Caleb Dume to escape the Purge. Shortly afterwards, the Bad Batch (minus Crosshair) goes on the run with the clone child Omega, who turns out to be another unmodified (albeit female) clone of Jango Fett.

Meanwhile, Sidious decides to end the war by sending Vader to the planet Mustafar, where the new Sith Lord kills all the remaining Separatist leaders and shuts down the clone army. Obi-Wan and Yoda make their move: The former goes to fight Vader on Mustafar, while the latter confronts Sidious on Coruscant. Unfortunately, Padme reaches Vader first. When she tries to make him see the error of his ways, he nearly chokes her to death. Sidious battles Yoda to a stalemate, while Obi-Wan gains the high ground and defeats Vader by severing his legs and remaining arm and leaving him to burn to death in a lava flow.

Heroes forced into exile
20th Century Fox
After Obi-Wan returns from Mustafar with an unconscious Padme, he and Yoda regroup with Senator Bail Organa of Alderaan. Padme gives birth to twins Luke and Leia before passing away, leaving the children effectively orphaned. Yoda suggests splitting the twins up and placing them in hiding. Leia is adopted by Organa and his wife Breha, while Luke is sent to Tatooine to live with Anakin's stepbrother, Owen Lars, and his wife Beru.

Both Obi-Wan and Yoda go into exile to plan the eventual resurgence of the Jedi. Obi-Wan moves to Tatooine to keep watch over Luke, while Yoda travels to the swamps of Dagobah to live in solitude and reflect on a defeat he never saw coming. In the absence of the Jedi, Darth Sidious/Emperor Palpatine consolidates his vast power with Vader (now wearing a black, armored life support suit) by his side. They eliminate political opponents as necessary and turn the Empire into a military dictatorship. Even as Sidious celebrates, however, a small group of leaders — among them Bail Organa and Mon Mothma – are already sowing the seeds of rebellion.

The return of Obi-Wan Kenobi
Disney+
Ten years after the Great Jedi Purge, Palpatine obsessively pursues any leads on former Jedi in hiding. He creates an order of elite warriors known as Inquisitors to further this goal, dispatching them throughout the galaxy to kill Jedi. Many Inquisitors are former Jedi themselves, including Reva, now going by "Third Sister." Still intent on killing Darth Vader, Reva becomes obsessed with locating Obi-Wan Kenobi, hoping Anakin Skywalker's former master will draw out Vader.

Meanwhile, Obi-Wan has become a shadow of his former self. Haunted by memories of the war and Anakin's betrayal, the old Jedi, now calling himself "Ben Kenobi," cuts himself off from the Force and chooses to watch Luke only from afar. However, he's pulled back into action when Reva hires criminals to kidnap 10-year-old Princess Leia Organa from Alderaan, hoping her adoptive father Bail Organa will bring Obi-Wan out of hiding.

Although Obi-Wan rescues Leia, his actions bring him before Darth Vader. Taking advantage of Obi-Wan's weakened state, Vader tortures his former friend, but Jedi sympathizers get Obi-Wan to safety. When Leia is recaptured by Reva, Obi-Wan finds hope in his allies and love for Leia and mounts a successful rescue mission. Still pursued by Vader, Obi-Wan chooses to face his former apprentice. With his renewed connection to the Force, Obi-Wan defeats Vader in a decisive battle.

Back on Tatooine, Reva, having failed to kill Darth Vader, decides to track down and kill Luke Skywalker upon learning of the boy's existence in a message left by Bail Organa. After overpowering Luke's Uncle Owen and Aunt Beru, Reva attempts to murder Luke but can't after recognizing that she's about to commit the same type of atrocity Anakin did during Order 66. Informed by Obi-Wan that she must now choose a new path, Reva lays down her Inquisitor weapon.

In the aftermath, Obi-Wan introduces himself to Luke and reconnects with the Force Ghost of his Jedi Master Qui-Gon Jinn. He also gets to say goodbye to Leia and lets her know she can call on his help again ... but they must be careful not to let anyone know about their friendship. Inspired by her experiences with Obi-Wan, Leia decides to continue helping people, both as a politician and a fighter.

A rebel without a cause
Walt Disney Studio Motion Pictures
Though much of the Star Wars story revolves around the exploits of the Skywalker family, one key player has a decidedly different origin. Han Solo, a Corellian orphan working for a local crime lord, makes a failed attempt to escape the planet with his girlfriend, Qi'ra. This leads him to enlist in the Imperial Navy. After three years of service, during which time he's expelled from the flight academy and made an infantryman, Solo deserts and joins up with an outlaw named Beckett to earn a new life for himself as a pilot and smuggler.

His path through the underworld of the Outer Rim reunites him with Qi'ra, now a trusted lieutenant in the Crimson Dawn crime syndicate. They embark on a mission to steal a valuable shipment of coaxium fuel for Crimson Dawn boss Dryden Vos. Along the way, Solo meets the Wookiee Chewbacca, obtains the Millennium Falcon from gambler Lando Calrissian, and evades Imperial ships by making the deadly Kessel Run in twelve parsecs (as long as you round down).

Shortly after stealing the coaxium, Solo discovers rival gang Enfys Nest is made up of freedom fighters trying to start a rebellion against the Empire. Sympathetic to their cause, Solo betrays Dryden Vos and gives the coaxium to these early Rebels. However, Solo is betrayed by both Beckett, whom he's forced to kill, and Qi'ra, who leaves Han for her real boss: Maul. Disillusioned and distrustful, Solo remains a smuggler for the next decade.

Rise of the Rebels
Disney XD
Over time, the small band of resistance leaders met by Han Solo and the Jedi sympathizers aided by Obi Wan Kenobi grow more organized, and the Rebel Alliance begins to take root. Initially, the movement is a guerrilla affair divided into multiple cells, who have little knowledge of each other. One cell, which travels aboard a light freighter named Ghost, consists of ex-Padawan Caleb Dume (now calling himself Kanan Jarrus), Hera Syndulla, C1-10P (aka Chopper), Garazeb Orrelios, Jacen Syndulla, Sabine Wren, and Ezra Bridger, a young Force-sensitive man who becomes Kanan's apprentice. During a mission, Ezra encounters an elderly Maul in an abandoned Sith Temple. Still a physical threat, Maul initially presents himself as an ally. However, it soon becomes apparent he wants to groom Ezra as his new apprentice. Ultimately, Maul tracks down Obi-Wan, who's still watching over Luke Skywalker on Tatooine. When Maul threatens Luke's life, Obi-Wan kills the former Sith Lord — for good this time.

Ahsoka, now working as a Rebel informant codenamed "Fulcrum," makes contact with the Ghost crew and joins them on multiple missions. Her time with them is cut short, however, when she battles Darth Vader on the planet Malachor. Realizing who Vader really is, Ahsoka swears she won't leave him, and is seemingly killed. Later, Ezra finds himself in the World Between Worlds, a mystical dimension that connects all space and time. Hearing the voices of Jedi from the past, present, and future, Ezra sees Ahsoka just as Vader is about to kill her. He pulls her out of her time and into his. Ezra eventually disappears alongside Grand Admiral Thrawn while freeing his people from the Empire's control.

The fall of Mandalore
Disney+
Following the Siege of Mandalore and Maul's capture, Bo-Katan is made regent of Mandalore by the Republic. However, she loses this position after the Empire occupies the planet and establishes an Imperial Academy. Intent on reclaiming her world, Bo-Katan nearly gets her chance when Sabine Wren comes into possession of the Darksaber, which she offers to Bo-Katan. However, since Bo-Katan did not earn this weapon in combat, her claim to it (and Mandalore's throne) becomes suspect.

Around this time, a young boy named Din Djarin is orphaned when Separatist battle droids invade his village. Before the droids can kill him, Din is saved by the Children of the Watch, a zealous Mandalorian cult. Raised in their ways, Din comes to believe he can never remove his helmet in the presence of others and still be considered a Mandalorian. Meanwhile, the Empire, frustrated by its inability to control Mandalore, launches a Great Purge that leads to the near-total genocide of the planet's people. Later known as the Night of a Thousand Tears, this attack scatters surviving Mandalorians across the galaxy. The Empire, in full control, casts Mandalorian stockpiles of beskar steel into Imperial ingots. Elsewhere, Imperial officer Moff Gideon takes the Darksaber from Bo-Katan.

As the Empire appears to grow in strength, Galen Erso, a Rebel sympathizer forced to work on the Death Star, a massive battle station with the power to wipe out an entire planet, places a key flaw that will allow the Rebels to destroy it. Galen gets a message through to his daughter Jyn, who rallies a group of Rebels and the Guardians of the Whills to steal the Death Star plans. In an all-out battle on the planet Scraif, the team succeeds at the cost of their lives, giving the struggling Rebel Alliance hope.

A new hope emerges
20th Century Fox
Princess Leia Organa, now a key member of the Rebel Alliance, flees Scarif with the Death Star plans. When Vader shows up to capture her, Leia hides the plans and a message to her old friend Obi-Wan Kenobi in a droid named R2-D2 who escapes to Tatooine in a pod with another droid named C-3PO. The plans fall into the hands of Leia's twin brother, Luke Skywalker, a farm boy with dreams of being a Rebel pilot. After viewing Leia's message, Luke seeks out the old Jedi, still going by Ben Kenobi. Obi-Wan reveals he was once a Jedi Knight, though he keeps Vader's identity a secret. 

Determined to get the plans to Alderaan, Luke and Obi-Wan hire Han Solo (in serious debt to gangster Jabba the Hutt) and Chewbacca to take them there. Sadly, Alderaan is obliterated by the Death Star's commander, Grand Moff Tarkin. Obi-Wan, Luke, Han, and Chewbacca infiltrate the station, but Vader soon senses his former master's presence. A long-awaited rematch between Obi-Wan and Vader ensues, which ends in Obi-Wan's death.

Back at the Rebel base on Yavin IV, the Alliance forms a plan to exploit the Death Star's fatal flaw. Luke volunteers to fight, while Han Solo leaves with a hefty reward. The assault commences as Tarkin sends the Death Star to destroy the Alliance and Vader joins the counterattack in his own fighter. At the last moment, Han returns to help. He shoots Vader out of the sky, leaving Luke free to destroy the Death Star. With the help of the Force, Luke saves the Rebel base and hands the Empire its biggest defeat yet.

A major revelation
20th Century Fox
Three years pass. Luke, Han, Leia, and Chewie become a cohesive unit of freedom fighters for the Alliance, which moves its base to the remote ice planet Hoth. After thoroughly searching the galaxy, Vader locates the base and launches a full-scale assault, prompting an evacuation. Han, Leia, Chewie and C-3PO flee in the Falcon, while Luke departs for Dagobah with R2-D2, having received a message from Obi-Wan's ghost telling him to seek Jedi training from Yoda.

As Luke grows, Palpatine senses his potential. Vader, realizing who Luke truly is, decides to convert him to the dark side. He also recruits a team of bounty hunters to find the Millennium Falcon. Among their number is Boba Fett, now regarded as one of the deadliest bounty hunters in the universe. After being ordered to take Han Solo alive, Fett tracks the Falcon to the gas planet Bespin, where Solo's old friend Lando gives up the Falcon and her crew. Sensing his friends are in danger, Luke goes to Bespin against Yoda's wishes, leading him right into Vader's trap.

Intending to freeze Luke in carbonite, Vader tests the procedure on Han Solo, prompting Leia to admit her love for the smuggler. As Fett takes Solo's body to Jabba, Vader and Luke throw down in an epic lightsaber duel. After cutting off Luke's hand, Vader reveals he's Luke's father. Devastated, Luke falls into an air shaft and is rescued by Leia, Lando, and Chewie. They quickly start plotting Han's rescue.

Rescuing Han Solo
20th Century Fox
Leia and Lando infiltrate Jabba's palace, but Leia is captured after defrosting her boyfriend. Luke sends C-3PO and R2-D2 ahead as "gifts" for Jabba, before entering himself. Jabba captures Luke and tries to have him and Han thrown into a Sarlacc pit. But, as Luke reveals, his new lightsaber is hidden in R2-D2's body. Alongside Han, Chewie, and Lando, Luke annihilates Jabba's bodyguards. Leia, forced to toil as Jabba's slave girl, strangles the giant gangster with her own chains.

During the battle, Boba Fett, now employed by Jabba, falls into the Sarlacc pit after a blind Han Solo damages his jetpack. Fett manages to free himself with his flamethrower. Weakened and stripped of his armor by scavenging Jawas, Fett is captured and eventually adopted by a tribe of Tusken Raiders.

Luke briefly returns to Dagobah to complete his Jedi training, only to be told by a dying Yoda that he does not require any further instruction: Confronting Darth Vader will make him a true Jedi. As Yoda becomes one with the Force, he reveals there is another Skywalker. Later, Obi-Wan's ghost informs Luke this other Skywalker is his twin sister, whom Luke immediately deduces is Leia. Although Luke insists he can't kill his own father, Obi-Wan indicates that if he doesn't, the Emperor will win.

The redemption of Anakin Skywalker
20th Century Fox
The Death Star II is fitted with a shield generated by a satellite dish on the forest moon of Endor. The Rebels launch a covert attack to destroy this generator and a full-scale fleet assault to destroy the Death Star once the shield is down. Luke, Han, Leia, and Chewie lead the Endor team, while Lando, Admiral Ackbar, and Wedge Antilles lead the fleet strike.

The plan nearly goes south when Luke, Han, and Chewie are captured by the native Ewoks, but luckily, Leia and C-3PO get them on their side. Luke, realizing Vader is near, informs Leia of their relationship, then turns himself into Vader. As the battle commences, Vader brings Luke before the Emperor, who attempts to convert him. Luke resists until the Emperor reveals the Death Star is fully operational and capable of destroying the entire Rebel fleet. Hoping to kill the Emperor, Luke summons his lightsaber, leading to a duel with Vader. Tapping into his anger, Luke manages to overpower his father — but as he realizes he's following his dark example, Luke throws his lightsaber aside and proclaims himself a Jedi.

Enraged, the Emperor tortures Luke with Force lightning. Pushed to the limit, Vader throws his master into the station's reactor core, apparently killing him. He dies soon after, redeemed. On Endor, Han and Leia destroy the shield generator, and the Rebel fleet destroys the Death Star. During the ensuing celebration, Luke burns his father's body, and watches Anakin's Force ghost join Obi-Wan and Yoda. Elsewhere, Ahsoka resurfaces and reunites with Sabine Wren. They go in search of a still-missing Ezra Bridger.

Aftermath of the Empire
Disney+
News of Palpatine and Vader's deaths cause celebrations to break out across the galaxy. The Empire's remnants are sent into what ultimately becomes a semi-organized retreat. There are a few battles left to fight in the Civil War, but the Battle of Jakku, which takes place a year after the Battle of Endor, marks the last major conflict. Imperial loyalists are defeated and their military prowess is crippled.

Despite this, remaining Imperial forces manage to do some major damage throughout the galaxy. Acting on posthumous instructions left by Darth Sidious known as "Operation Cinder," Imperial officers lay waste to multiple planets including Candovant, Abednedo, Commenor, and Cardos, which Sidious wanted to punish for failing to prevent his death. On the planet Burnin Konn, sadistic Imperial general Valin Hess orders a resisting city to be wiped out. This action kills thousands of people, including his entire division. One survivor, sharpshooter Migs Mayfeld, goes on to become a hired gun with deep resentments toward the Empire and Hess.

New players arise
Disney+
Though the Rebel Alliance is working hard to establish a New Republic, no one knows who's truly in charge. Several key players emerge from this lawless turmoil. On the planet Nevarro, grown bounty hunter Din Djarin accepts a mysterious commission in exchange for a huge stockpile of beskar ingots. This job takes him to a desert planet, where he discovers Grogu, an infant of Yoda's species. Din bonds with the Child and decides to safeguard him from other bounty hunters and Imperial remnants.

Meanwhile, Boba Fett, having lived among the Tusken Raiders for many years, attempts to help his new family by leading an attack on a spice-running hovertrain that regularly terrorizes his tribe. Unfortunately, this causes his entire tribe to be destroyed by the criminal Pyke Syndicate, who frame a local biker gang for the crime. After taking his revenge on the gang, Fett forms an alliance with fellow bounty hunter Fennec Shand and sets out to track down his missing armor.

Said armor has fallen into the possession of Cobb Vanth, the marshal of a small town on Tatooine called Mos Pelgo. Vanth uses the armor to drive the Mining Collective away from his town, but later gives it up to Din Djarin after the Mandalorian helps him kill a krayt dragon that's been menacing the town. Din later encounters Boba Fett and allows him to reclaim the armor.

The Mandalorians reshape the galaxy
Disney+
Realizing he can't protect Grogu indefinitely, Din attempts to find the child's people. He comes into contact with new allies including Bo-Katan and Ahsoka Tano, who lead them to the planet Tython. There, Grogu reaches out through the Force to another member of his kind. In the process, the hapless little one is kidnapped by Imperial forces led by Moff Gideon. Din enters into an alliance with Boba Fett and Fennec Shand to rescue Grogu. He also enlists Migs Mayfeld, who helps him infiltrate an Imperial base and download key information. Mayfeld manages to kill Valin Hess in the process.

Despite being aided by Bo-Katan, Boba Fett, former Rebel Cara Dune, and Mandalorian Koska Reeves, Din's rescue attempt nearly fails after Moff Gideon unleashes his army of Dark Troopers. At the last instant, Luke Skywalker — alerted by Grogu's distress call — arrives and saves the entire team. Din defeats Gideon in battle, winning the Darksaber, which puts him at odds with Bo-Katan. Grogu leaves with Luke, who intends to make him the first student of his new Jedi Academy. After consulting with Ahsoka and realizing Grogu would rather stay with Din, however, Luke lets him go.

Meanwhile, Boba Fett returns to Tatooine, where he kills Jabba the Hutt's former majordomo Bib Fortuna and takes over his syndicate. Intending to build a new crime family with Fennec Shand, Fett runs into problems with the Pyke Syndicate, who don't like Fett's interference in the drug trade. Fett recruits Din, Wookiee bounty hunter Krrsantan, a gang of cyborgs, and the people of Cobb Vanth's town to help take down the syndicate. Although the Pykes send Fett's old mentor, the deadly Cad Bane, after him, Fett gains the upper hand and becomes Tatooine's reigning power.

New villains arise
Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures
As major Rebel Alliance figures like Princess Leia and Mon Mothma shape the New Republic, the Empire's remnants retreat to the Outer Rim, as part of a contingency plan developed by Palpatine. There, they fall under the command of a mysterious Force user named Snoke, who has a passion for the dark side and key knowledge of both the Empire and the Skywalker bloodline. The ashes of the Empire soon give birth to the fearsome First Order.

Meanwhile, Han and Leia have a son, Ben Solo, named in honor of Leia's friend Ben Kenobi. Luke finally starts a temple and takes Ben on as a student. Unfortunately, Snoke begins to influence Ben's personality, bringing out his darker tendencies. The young Jedi turns on Luke, converting some students and slaughtering others. Heartbroken, Luke goes into exile. Meanwhile, Leia's own political career is destroyed when opponents discover her connection to Darth Vader and turn public opinion against her. Sensing the threat of Snoke and the First Order, Leia becomes a General and forms an underground movement separate from the Republic, known as the Resistance.

Where is Luke Skywalker?
Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures
Snoke ultimately brings the First Order out of the shadows three decades after the Empire's defeat, with the goal of taking over the galaxy and exterminating Luke Skywalker. With the help of his military commander, General Armitage Hux, Snoke develops a massive system-killing weapon known as Starkiller Base. Meanwhile, he attempts to find Luke Skywalker through Ben Solo, now a powerful dark side warrior known as Kylo Ren.

Luke's location is secreted away on a star map fragment hidden in a droid named BB-8. This droid is found by a Jakku scavenger named Rey, who teams up with First Order deserter Finn to return BB-8 to his base. Pursued by the First Order, Rey and Finn steal the long-dormant Millennium Falcon, only to run into Han Solo and Chewbacca.

With Han and Chewie's help, Rey and Finn are able to return Luke's map to Leia and the Resistance — but not before Starkiller Base is activated. It wipes out the capital of the New Republic and sends the galaxy into a wave of chaos. Meanwhile, Rey comes across Anakin Skywalker's original lightsaber, which Kylo Ren covets. Curious about this Force-sensitive girl, Kylo abducts Rey, hoping to uncover Luke's hidden location.

The next hope emerges
Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures
With little time to mourn the Republic, General Leia Organa, Han Solo, Poe Dameron, Finn, and the Resistance launch a desperate attack to rescue Rey and destroy Starkiller Base. While rigging the base with explosives, Han confronts his son. But Kylo, hoping to prove he's truly turned to the Dark Side, murders his dad in cold blood.

Horrified, Rey takes up Anakin's lightsaber and duels Kylo Ren using the Force gifts she's discovered while in First Order captivity. She defeats him but doesn't kill him. Hux and Kylo evacuate the base to return to Snoke, while Chewbacca rescues Rey and an injured Finn. Poe and his team manage to critically damage Starkiller Base, which explodes.

After the battle, R2-D2 — who's been powered down since Luke disappeared — reveals he can complete the partial map BB-8 carries. Using this information, Rey journeys with R2-D2 and Chewbacca to a remote island on the planet Ahch-To. There, she asks Luke for help in destroying the First Order and to teach her the ways of the Force.

Luke Skywalker, reluctant master
Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures
Following the destruction of Starkiller Base, the First Order attacks the Resistance base on D'Qar, forcing them to evacuate. Poe Dameron leads a massive attack on the First Order fleet against General Leia Organa's wishes, and while the Resistance does escape, they lose many ships and pilots in the process.

What's worse, the First Order can track the Resistance through hyperspace. It's only a matter of time before their fleet destroys the Resistance fighters. Hoping to disable the First Order's tracking device, Finn and fellow Resistance fighter Rose journey to lavish casino town Canto Bight, where they hope to find a master codebreaker capable of sabotaging the First Order. Instead, they team up with rogue thief DJ, who ends up selling them out.

Meanwhile, Rey discovers Luke has become a shell of his former self who believes the Jedis' hubris has doomed the galaxy to darkness. As she tries to convince Luke to help the Resistance, Rey begins experiencing Force-connected conversations with Kylo Ren that are secretly engineered by Snoke. Luke reveals he briefly considered killing a young Ben Solo to prevent his fall to the dark side, which only made it easier for Snoke to convert him. Believing Ben is still capable of redemption, Rey leaves the island. Yoda's Force ghost uses Force lightning to burn down the planet's Jedi library, but not before Rey manages to smuggle out some of the ancient texts.

The last Jedi
Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures
Amid many struggles, Leia and Vice Admiral Holdo stage a last-ditch effort to preserve the Resistance, which gives the remaining fighters a way to reach an old Rebel base on the planet Crait. Unfortunately, DJ reveals this plan to the First Order. They begin picking off the evacuation transports.

On Snoke's flagship, Rey allows herself to be captured so she can convert Kylo. Initially, this seems to work: Kylo kills Snoke and helps Rey fight off his guards. However, Kylo soon reveals his plans to become Supreme Leader and rule the galaxy with Rey by his side. Rey engages him in battle and destroys Anakin Skywalker's lightsaber.

Unwilling to let the Resistance die, Vice Admiral Holdo flies the Resistance flagship into the First Order's fleet, crippling their starships and enabling Finn, Rose, and Rey to escape. The Resistance then mounts a final defense on Crait as now-Supreme Leader Kylo Ren leads a ground assault. The Resistance is outmatched — but then Luke Skywalker arrives to confront Kylo Ren himself.

Luke engages Kylo Ren in a lightsaber duel, which allows the Resistance to flee. Once they're safe, Luke reveals he's actually a Force projection of the real Luke Skywalker, who is still back on Ahch-To. Unfortunately, this proves to be too much for the old Jedi. While the Resistance lives to fight on, Luke passes away, becoming one with the Force after years of closing himself off from it.

The dead speak
Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures
With Luke Skywalker gone, Rey trains with Leia. She also teaches herself Jedi lore using the texts she took from Ahch-To. Unfortunately, this keeps her out of many Resistance missions. As the Resistance is now drastically low on fighters, this is a major problem. They do gain one ally in the form of a secret First Order spy, however, later revealed to be Hux. He confirms the rumors gripping the galaxy: Emperor Palpatine has returned. This infuriates Kylo Ren, who hunts Palpatine down on the hidden Sith world of Exegol. 

The Supreme Leader soon finds the old Emperor, who's being kept alive by a complex life support system. Palpatine, it turns out, has been behind the First Order all along. He created Snoke using cloning technology and has been influencing Kylo Ren his entire life. The Sith Lord makes his secret protégé an offer: Kylo can rule the galaxy as a new Emperor with the help of a long-hidden fleet of planet-killing ships if he agrees to kill Rey.

Meanwhile, the Resistance goes in search of a Sith Wayfinder, which can point the way to Palpatine. This journey leads them across several planets, where they fight everyone from Kylo Ren to First Order forces to the Knights of Ren. Along the way, Rey grows increasingly wary of her place in the world. This anxiety only increases when she discovers she has Sith abilities, including the power to project Force lightning.

All of the Jedi against all of the Sith
Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures
Rey's anxieties regarding her identity come to a peak when Kylo Ren reveals her true heritage: She's Palpatine's granddaughter and heir to his power. After learning the truth, Rey nearly kills Kylo — but after Leia intervenes to save her son with her dying breath, she heals him. Rey considers going into exile but is convinced to return to the fight by the spirit of Luke Skywalker. Using Kylo's Wayfinder, Rey journeys to Exegol to confront Palpatine. 

There, the revived Emperor reveals his true plan: To possess her body and become the new Empress and leader of the Sith. Rey refuses, and fights Palpatine with the help of a redeemed Kylo Ren, only for Palpatine to drain their life energies and bring himself back to full power. When all seems lost, Rey draws on all the Jedi who came before her, allowing her to counter Palpatine, who represents the spirits of the Sith. Outside the Emperor's fortress, a Resistance fleet composed of thousands of random ships fights to save the galaxy from the Final Order fleet. In the end, both the Emperor and the fleet are defeated, and the galaxy is saved.

In the aftermath of the battle, Rey forges her own lightsaber and buries those of her teachers in the Tatooine desert. Finally, she reveals she has taken a new name: Rey Skywalker. The Skywalker line will live on through her.


Every entry in the sprawling Star Wars franchise has a few timeless themes in common: good vs. evil, nature vs. technology, shooting first vs. holding your fire. The most central theme of pretty much all the comics, films, video games, and other spin-offs, though, is power (yes, even the Ewok movies). Many types abound, from the Empire's far-reaching political might to the courageous underdogs of the Resistance.  

Individuals also have power in the Star Wars universe, which is home to countless formidable characters, from Jedi and Sith to mythical Force users with ancient abilities. These beings are sometimes great warriors who wield a lightsaber or mystics with otherworldly powers and special connections to the Force. They came from the minds of George Lucas, Dave Filoni, and every contributing creator and author in between. Here are the most powerful beings in the Star Wars canon. 

Be forewarned: this article contains spoilers from all of the existing Star Wars films and various TV shows.

15. Grand Admiral Thrawn

Thrawn is the only character on this list without a connection to the Force of some kind or other. The cunning Chiss admiral gets by on his wits, knowledge, and years of loyalty to the Imperial machine. Grand Admiral Thrawn was first introduced in the Timothy Zahn book "Heir to the Empire" — now a part of the Star Wars "Legends" canon. Thanks to these books and other EU works, Thrawn became a fan favorite for his bloodthirstiness and calculated approach to hunting the Jedi and Rebel scum. 

Thrawn was reintroduced into the canon in Star Wars Rebels as a primary antagonist in seasons three and four. He's definitely one of the best villains in the whole Filoni-verse of animated Star Wars. Thrawn's role going forward is a bit ambiguous, but it's safe to say he'll become even more important to the Star Wars universe very soon. Ahsoka name-drops him during her Mandalorian appearance, asking, "Where is Thrawn?" This has fueled rumors that he'll make an appearance whenever that show drops onto Disney+.

14. Revan

Reestablishing Revan in the Star Wars canon is maybe the best thing to come out of The Rise of Skywalker. This ancient Sith Lord made his debut in Bioware's beloved Star Wars RPG Knights of the Old Republic, existing centuries before any of the movies. In the Legends timeline, Revan is a legendary Force user, one who fought on both the Jedi and Sith sides during the Mandalorian Wars, Jedi Civil War, and the Great Galactic War.

Revan doesn't actually appear in The Rise of Skywalker but in its companion, The Visual Dictionary. Here it is explained that the red troopers introduced in the film are Sith Troopers, with each legion named after a historic Sith from the deep lore and non-canonical games. In the book, you can see one is called "The Revan Legion."

It's worth noting that this villain also nearly made an appearance (alongside Darth Bane) in a deleted scene in the Mortis arc of The Clone Wars. Both Sith Lords were to appear in a vision to the Son, showing the character's connection to the Dark Side of the Force and the influences sending him down his path of destruction.

13. Mace Windu

Throughout the Republic era, Mace Windu is one of the most capable and accomplished fighters in an army full of strong Jedi. He's a hero of the Republic army, has eliminated more battle droids than anyone can count, and would have probably lived through Order 66 if Anakin hadn't made it to him first. 

Many of the Jedi of the Republic era of Star Wars were indeed very strong — and certainly show-offy with their lightsabers — but it's easy to forget that Windu nearly single-handedly toppled Emperor Palpatine in Revenge of the Sith. This is what sets him apart from the rest of the pack. The epic lightsaber battle is ridiculous fun to watch, and it showcases Mace's true abilities as a warrior. At the end, Mace has his lightsaber to Palpatine's throat, but it's Sheev's lucky day when Anakin comes to save him and begins to complete his dark transformation into Darth Vader.

12. Ahsoka Tano

Once the young apprentice of Anakin during the Clone War, Ahsoka goes on a journey of self-discovery that leads to her abandoning the Jedi order and their ways. Over the course of the show, Ahsoka faces off against Grievous, Ventress, and Darth Maul, coming out the other end a hardened warrior. As her power grows, so does her compassion, and she gains clarity about the role the Jedi Order is truly serving.

Thanks to a little help from everyone's favorite clone commander, Rex, Ahsoka survived the great Jedi purge. By the time we reach the period of post-Empire collapse seen on The Mandalorian, Ahsoka has become one of the most powerful living characters in the Star Wars universe. 

She's not technically a Jedi anymore, but Ahsoka's Jedi training, deep connection to the Force, and decades spent in hiding honing her skills make her one of the most skilled remaining lightsaber wielders. Her surprise appearance in The Mandalorian only proved her power and left fans wanting even more. They'll be getting what they want soon enough in the Disney+ show starring Rosario Dawson slated for 2022.

11. Bendu

Not all Force users are Jedi, as Star Wars Rebels shows with one of its coolest creations: Bendu. Bendu is an ancient Force-sensitive rock creature who lives on Atollon in the Lothal system and plays a pivotal role in season 3 of Rebels.

After Kanan Jarrus — one of the few living Jedi Knights during the reign of the Empire and a father figure to the Ghost crew — loses his eyesight in a duel with Maul, he retreats to Lothal to sort out his life. It is here that Kanan discovers Bendu. The mystic creature awakes from a years-long slumber after sensing Kanan's imbalance and his cry for help. In an act of altruism, Bendu trains Kanan to become more in touch with the Force, teaching him to use it to see. This more or less turns Kanan into Daredevil with a lightsaber which, no lie, is extremely cool.

Bendu gets to show their true power during the season 3 finale. Thrawn's assault on Atollon enrages the entity and Bendu creates a lightning storm that changes the tide in the Rebel's favor.

10. Obi-Wan Kenobi

Don't you mean old Ben Kenobi? No matter what you call him, it's hard to deny Obi-Wan's importance in the grander Star Wars fiction. From apprentice to mentor, he proved himself as a legendary warrior and wise Jedi Master.

Before he became General Kenobi of the Clone Wars, Obi-Wan was the apprentice of Qui-Gon Jinn. He defeated Darth Maul in the "duel of the fates," losing his master but gaining an unexpected apprentice. Throughout the prequels and The Clone Wars, Obi-Wan is one of the best Jedi of his time. As a warrior, he's a match for Grievous and Dooku, not to mention Asajj Ventress. At the same time, he serves as one of the leading tacticians in the Republic army and a leading voice on the Jedi council. And of course, Obi-Wan managed to survive the great Jedi purge to become one of the last living Jedi.

All of this loops back around to 1977 and Obi-Wan's not-so-humble origins as Luke's mentor. With his transformation complete, Obi-Wan is able to serve his final purpose and send Luke on the path to redeeming his father. A worthy end to one of the light side of the galaxy's finest warriors.

9. Darth Plagueis

Did you ever hear the tragedy of Darth Plagueis the Wise? I thought not. It's not a story the Jedi would tell you. The most memed moment in Star Wars history, the story Palpatine tells Anakin of his master introduced the world to one of the most powerful Sith Lords of all time.

As Palpatine explained, Darth Plagueis was a powerful — and let's not forget wise — Sith who gained "unnatural powers." According to Palpatine, Plagueis learned how to bring the dead back to life and how to save the ones he cared about. Plagueis was certainly powerful, but whether he actually managed to resurrect anyone is debatable. It is true much of his life was spent studying midichlorians and attempting to master death itself, but Plagueis never finished his research before he was executed by his apprentice. This completed yet another cycle of the Sith, as Plagueis before him had done the same to his master, Darth Tenebrous.

8. The Force Priestesses

Not all who have power wield it in a destructive way. The Force Priestesses hold the power of life and death and are some of the most powerful mystic Force users. They never fight, but the secret to unlocking the power they do hold has been sought by many great Jedi and Sith.

The five Force Priestesses have the key to a kind of immortality: They're the gatekeepers who give the Jedi the ability to become Force ghosts. They aid Yoda in his journey to attain this power in a season 6 arc of The Clone Wars. This set of episodes explains the process Jedi must go through to become ghosts, making it vitally clear that only the most powerful Jedi most connected to the Force can learn this ability. Incidentally, aside from keeping an eye on Luke, Yoda sent Obi-Wan to Tatooine at the end of Revenge of the Sith to master this technique.

7. Darth Bane

This is one that gets in on a technicality, but it's impossible to deny the influence and power of Darth Bane in the Star Wars lore as a whole. Bane appears in one of Yoda's flashbacks in his season 6 Clone Wars arc. This was the first official appearance of Bane in the canon after the Disney acquisition, which allowed his important backstory to be written back into the official arc of Star Wars.

Darth Bane is canonically one of the most powerful Sith Lords of all time. Originally conceptualized by Lucas during the creation of The Phantom Menace, Bane is the origin point of the modern incarnation of the Sith order following the Jedi-Sith war. He established the rule of two, where there are only one master and one apprentice at a time, and only by slaying their master can a Sith apprentice gain the title of master. He also appears in the deleted "Ghosts of Mortis" scene alongside Revan.

6. The Ones/The Celestials

In one of the more fantasy-inspired adventures in The Clone Wars — as opposed to the show's more typical futuristic, militarized representation of science fiction — we meet the most powerful family in the galaxy. In the Mortis arc of The Clone Wars, a highlight of the series, Anakin, Obi-Wan, and Ahsoka encounter The Ones, a family of three Force-users who have an incredible and unique power. 

Known as Celestials, the Father, the Son, and the Daughter have existed for millennia and are closer to Gods than humans. They can see the future and seem to be the only beings who know the true meaning of the prophecy — that Anakin is meant to become Vader to destroy the Emperor. The Father even shows Anakin his destiny during the Clone Wars arc, but when the Celestials were destroyed and returned to the Force at the end of these episodes, the Jedi all forget what they saw and learned on Mortis. These legendary Force magicians are referenced again in the final season of Rebels. 

5. Rey

Rey is the granddaughter of Emperor Palpatine (somehow), but her power doesn't come from her Sith blood. It comes from her love and willingness to help others. In The Force Awakens and The Last Jedi, Rey is still in a process of training and self-discovery. She can almost win a fight with Kylo Ren, but not quite. In these movies, her Force power and battle skills don't hold a candle to many of the great Force users of the Star Wars canon — but even Luke Skywalker started off scrappy.

It's only at the end of Rey's arc that we see why she's one of the most powerful Jedi. In the climactic battle at the end of The Rise of Skywalker, Rey calls on the strength of all the Jedi to defeat Palpatine and the spirits of all the Sith. She opens herself up to be a vessel to all the Jedi who ever lived in order to prove the potency of the light side. Good night, Grandpa Sheev. Haters of the new trilogy can say what they will, but it's hard to deny Rey's power by the end of the Skywalker Saga.

4. Luke Skywalker

Who knew that the whiny boy on Tatooine who only wanted to "go to Tashi Station to pick up some power convertors" would become the hero of the universe? Most people, probably, figured it out after watching Star Wars in 1977. Still, Luke's journey is a fascinating one full of success, power, and — most poignantly — failure.

Luke Skywalker wasn't always the most powerful Jedi in the universe, but he held the title for probably 40 years between the end of Return of the Jedi and the new generation in The Force Awakens. The very human way he conquered his internal and external struggles, especially in The Empire Strikes Back, earned the admiration of an entire generation of Star Wars fans. He successfully turned Vader and brought his true father back to say one last goodbye, overthrowing the Empire along the way. Luke is the father of a generation of Jedi. He leads and learns until he makes the ultimate sacrifice to defeat Kylo Ren and The First Order on Crait. This is Luke's final galaxy-saving victory in a lifetime full of them.

3. Yoda

Thanks to Yoda — everyone's favorite green Muppet — we get a glimpse into the burden of the master, and what happens when they fail. Luke follows a similar arc, but Yoda was ultimately the more powerful Jedi. Yoda was the most influential Jedi to ever exist.

As the Grand Master of the Jedi Order during the Republic era, Yoda trained generation upon generation of Jedi knights and masters. While he's known for his odd speech patterns and wisdom above all else, the prequels showed Star Wars fans Yoda is no schlub with a lightsaber. He stands his own against Darth Sidious in some of the most bombastic fights in the series (The Clone Wars took a much more toned-down approach to Yoda's fighting style).

A wise master to all and living beyond his years as an omnipresent Force ghost, Yoda will always be there to guide young Jedi. His connection to the Force is unbreakable.

2. Darth Sidious/Emperor Palpatine

Of the many ways to measure "power" for this ranking, Emperor Sheev Palpatine — Darth Sidious to his friends — gets an A rank in pretty much every category.  

In terms of political power, Palpatine wields more than anyone in the Galactic Senate during the Republic era. He is the puppet master behind the entire Clone War, playing all sides in a cruel, calculated manner. As any Star Wars fan knows, he succeeds. The Republic collapses, the Jedi get wiped out, and the Emperor wins absolute control for 30 years until he's forced to let go. 

This is without even mentioning his alter ego, Sidious the Sith Lord — the ultimate villain of the Skywalker saga. In his youth, Sidious was a fighter able to rival Yoda and the best of the Jedi Order. By the time he's resurrected on Exegol, Palpatine has transcended beyond the need for a functional human form and is fully a part of the dark side of the Force.

1. Darth Vader/Anakin Skywalker

It's undeniable that Darth Vader belongs at the top of this list. He is the "Chosen One," after all. It can be argued that throughout all the suffering and destruction he caused, Anakin Skywalker did eventually bring balance to the Force.

During his prime as a General in the Clone War, Anakin was a daring warrior with incredible lightsaber skills that helped him take down Count Dooku. He was a reckless but successful tactician. Anakin was known by both clones and Separatists as the best fighter pilot in the galaxy. Even before his tragic fall to the Dark Side, Anakin was one of the most powerful Jedi alive, but Vader is a whole other ballgame.

What is there to say about the iconic villain that hasn't been said hundreds of thousands of times already? While the Emperor reigns, he is the most feared being in the Galactic Republic. Both Obi-Wan and Palpatine met their demise at his hands. No matter which way you slice it, Darth Vader is the most powerful being in Star Wars. Over 40 years later, no one can top him.

We're here to talk about the most powerful Sith in the Star Wars universe, but first we have to define what we mean by "powerful." Some among this super-powered clan of mystical space-faring evildoers have wielded powerful magic; others have exerted a lasting impact on the galaxy. Some Sith were more powerful in the ways of the Force than they were influential, while others achieved incredible things despite lacking total command of that wacky space magic. We're going to draw on both definitions to pin down who among the terrifying pantheon of Sith Lords represents the full package of Star Wars villainy.

Darth Bane

Darth Bane is the Star Wars expanded universe's version of a Founding Father when it comes to the Dark Side of the Force. He believed the Sith's organizational structure was deeply flawed. Before he came along, the Sith were much like the Jedi, in that there were a number of masters and apprentices throughout the galaxy, and he set out to condense the number of Sith in the galaxy—all the way down to a final pair. This philosophy was known as the Rule of Two.

Freedon Nadd

Freedon Nadd was a Jedi in the days of the Old Republic, with Force talents far beyond any of his peers. (Remember that sentence, because it's going to be a running theme in this list). While training he became jealous of his Jedi master's power and authority, so in true Sith fashion, he killed him and renounced his affiliation with the Jedi. Nadd traveled to Yavin 4 to be trained in the ways of the Dark Side by Naga Sadow, a Sith lord living in exile who once nearly brought to the Sith Empire to galactic dominance during the Great Hyperspace War.

Marka Ragnos

Marka Ragnos was a Sith Lord who grew tired of their unwillingness to expand beyond their homeworld of Korriban. His reign was ruthless and brutal, laying waste to any and all enemies who dared cross their path—but he didn't always achieve victories through violence. In fact, most of the time, he achieved victory without raising a finger. A master of manipulation, Ragnos set his adversaries against one another, using their mutually assured destruction to clear an easy path for the Sith.

Ragnos lived for over a century, and his story didn't end with his death. As a Force ghost, he pitted two Sith Lords against each other to determine which would be better suited for his vacant seat as Sith ruler, and Naga Sadow won the honor. Ragnos' spirit lingered for some time in a tomb on Korriban until bestowing another Jedi-turned-Sith, Exar Kun, the title of Dark Lord of the Sith. Kun eventually ignited the cataclysmic Great Sith War.

Darth Vitiate

Marka Ragnos recognized this young Force-sensitive boy's potential and gave him the planet Nathema to rule as his own—along with a new name: Darth Vitiate. When Ragnos died, Vitiate chose to not get involved in the battle for his place at the head of the Sith Empire, instead waiting for the perfect opportunity to seize power. That moment arrived in the fallout from the Great Hyperspace War.

Once out of hiding, Vitiate took over the minds of more than 8,000 Sith and forced them to take part in a 10-day ritual that ended with the complete obliteration of Nathema. He absorbed an entire planet's worth of Force energy, thus granting himself immortality, and from that point forward he was no longer Darth Vitiate—he was simply the Emperor.

When the Sith's version of a governing body, the Dark Counsel, conspired to kill the Emperor, he wiped them out in a single blow. He continued to rule the Sith for 1300 years—a reign unmatched in Star Wars expanded universe lore.

Darth Revan

Darth Revan also started as a Jedi who was turned to the Dark Side—in this case, because his superiors refused to indulge his curiosity of all aspects of the Force. He eventually graduated to the rank of Jedi Knight, though he soon found himself at odds with the Jedi Council when they refused to protect the lives of Outer Rim innocents caught in the Mandalorian Wars. Over their objections, Revan assembled at large Jedi defense team that ended up being the main reason the Republic won the war—and ultimately led to his own corruption.

Darth Nihilus

The Dark Side of the Force can be seen as a metaphor for addiction. Once someone with Force sensitivity gets a taste of the Dark Side, they find it immensely difficult to turn back, and they often end up dedicating their lives to it. Darth Nihilus' story offers a literal example of that principle in action: after he was caught in the detonation of a super-weapon known as the Mass Shadow Generator—ordered by Darth Revan—that destroyed the planet Malachor V, Nihilus' body was wrecked, and he was left with an insatiable craving for Force energy. He was, essentially, a force vampire.

Darth Plagueis

One of the running themes in Sith lore is their insatiable thirst for knowledge—knowledge that usually takes those who hold it into dark, morally questionable areas. Darth Plagueis wasn't the most skilled Force user, nor was he particularly good with a lightsaber, or even a tremendous military leader. Instead, Plagueis was a scholar and—if such a thing can be said about a disciple of mystical energy—something of a scientist. He focused his scholarly efforts on a single pursuit: figuring out how to manipulate the Force and midi-chlorians in a way that would allow him to live forever and possibly even bring the dead back to life. If Force users are space wizards, then Darth Plagueis was a space necromancer.

Darth Vader

Before he became Darth Vader, Anakin Skywalker was a Jedi apprentice—until his love for Naboo's Queen Amidala was used by the evil Sheev Palpatine, a.k.a. Darth Sidious, to twist him toward the Dark Side. Sidious poisoned Anakin's mind, turning him against everything Amidala stood for, and even ultimately against his own Jedi Master, the legendary Obi-Wan Kenobi. While Vader never fully lived up to his potential as a Sith (he had the highest midi-chrlorian count ever recorded, after all) he was instrumental in aiding Palpatine's ascent to Emperor. While Palpatine governed mercilessly from the safety of his throne, he had his lackey apprentice Darth Vader to do his dirty work around the galaxy.

Darth Sidious

Darth Sidious' rise to power can be seen as nothing but a masterstroke of the greatest strategic mind in all of Star Wars canon. Taking a note from his master, Darth Plagueis (whom Sidious killed because of that whole Rule of Two thing), he hid in plain sight as a senator who valiantly represented the citizens of Naboo. No one was certain of his malevolent intent until it was too late.

As Palpatine, Sidious clandestinely orchestrated the Clone Wars, which eventually granted him a tremendous amount of political power. His coronation as the all-powerful Emperor of the galaxy was completed with the final phase of his plan: Order 66, a command ordering clone troopers to exterminate all Jedi. In one fell swoop after decades of planning, Palpatine accomplished what every Sith before him had dreamed of, wiping out the Jedi and sending their few survivors into hiding—the same way the Jedi had vanquished the Sith countless times over thousands of years.

